### Notes from class Tuedsday, November 08 ###

DNA Methylation

[see slides](https://github.com/sr320/course-fish546-2016/blob/master/06-Notes/2016-FISH546-Methylation.pdf)

Folic acid is a methylator, can be used to alter methylation between individuals (see mouse examples in slides).

About 70% human cytosines are methylated (except promotor regions). 

Gene body - both exons and introns

We look at DNA methylation with FASTQ files. Bisulfite treatment (any non methylated C gets converted to T).

Bismark is an alignment tool for looking at methylation data.

So little of the gemone is expressed - so it's cheaper to do an enrichement step to just get methylated regions. This is performed with antibodies.

Christan proposed a theory on why organisms like marine invertebrates have so much more gene methyalation than say, birds or mammals. Perhaps because they expreience such dynamic environemntal conditions

GO terms: cell-to-cell signaling, signal transduction, cell adhesion...

There are some new sequencing approaches to detect methylation without using bisulfite (not the dynamic methylation, however). 

Last year Jay's project looked at DNA methylation in reef corals: he used blast to get protein data to get GO.

Claire Olson used [bedtools](http://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/content/tools/intersect.html) to look at differences in CpG locations

Transposable elements are sequences of DNA that can move around within the genome. Barbara McClintock discovered them.

**_MERV_**: a working model for DNA methylation function

Faster to adapt than mutational evolution. But still random. 

Low methylation means higher mutation rates (don't know why exactly).

_Switching Gears: Measuring changes in DNA methylation_:

How is DNA methylation replicated controlled? A big unknown. _Epigenetic inhertance_
